---
content_type: page
description: This syllabus section provides information on desired learning outcomes,
  course focus, course meeting times, course logistics, and grading.
learning_resource_types: []
ocw_type: CourseSection
title: Syllabus
uid: f628f5e1-8456-8b48-44e3-26ba67a7b224
video_files:
  video_thumbnail_file: null
video_metadata:
  youtube_id: null
---

Course Meeting Times
--------------------

Lectures: 2 sessions / week, 1.5 hours / session

Recitations: 1 session / week, 2 hours / session

Course Focus
------------

Use mathematical models to assess interactions between humans and the natural environment.

Desired Learning Outcomes
-------------------------

By the end of the course, you should be able to formulate and use mathematical models to:

*   Assess human impacts on the environment
*   Assess the economic value of natural resources

Beyond this course, you should be able to:

*   Expand your modeling abilities as you gain new understanding in science, engineering, economics, and other areas.
*   Apply what you have learned here in your career (not just to develop and use models yourself but also to critically assess model predictions generated by others).

Course Logistics
----------------

### General Topics (Modeling Building Blocks)

*   Mass balance
*   Energy balance
*   Mass and energy transport
*   Resource economics and life cycle analysis

### Class Format

Generally, the first half of each class will be a lecture on concepts and the second half will be a discussion of a related modeling application. All model codes presented in class will be made available.

### Assignments

Problem sets and research presentation (team-based), in-class quizzes, 2 exams, research paper (individual).

There will be no final exam.

### Team Formation

You can form your own teams of 3 people or contact the TA for help in forming a team. Teams should be identified by the first recitation.

### MATLAB®

Modeling in this class relies largely on MATLAB. You should have access to MATLAB software (Basic MATLAB and the Optimization Toolbox). See the {{% resource_link 2a3b4b56-1a0f-6d27-0195-939c76d43a28 "tools" %}} section for more information on MATLAB.

### Recitations

*   MATLAB tutorials
*   Communication tutorials
*   Help with problem sets
*   Exam reviews

### Attendance

Attendance is important and will be considered in grading.

### In-class Quizzes

15 minute quizzes (one question each) will be given most weeks, usually on Wednesday during the middle of class.

### Laptops

No laptops open during lectures (OK during recitation).

Contact us if you need access to a laptop during recitation. Power outlets are limited so please make sure your battery is charged.

### Comments and Feedback

Please provide comments and suggestions (anonymous or otherwise) as soon as an issue arises so we can make adjustments if necessary. We plan to set up a suggestion box for this purpose.

Grading
-------

{{< tableopen >}}
{{< theadopen >}}
{{< tropen >}}
{{< thopen >}}
ACTIVITIES
{{< thclose >}}
{{< thopen >}}
PERCENTAGES
{{< thclose >}}

{{< trclose >}}

{{< theadclose >}}
{{< tropen >}}
{{< tdopen >}}
Problem sets
{{< tdclose >}}
{{< tdopen >}}
20%
{{< tdclose >}}

{{< trclose >}}
{{< tropen >}}
{{< tdopen >}}
Short quizzes
{{< tdclose >}}
{{< tdopen >}}
10%
{{< tdclose >}}

{{< trclose >}}
{{< tropen >}}
{{< tdopen >}}
Exam 1
{{< tdclose >}}
{{< tdopen >}}
25%
{{< tdclose >}}

{{< trclose >}}
{{< tropen >}}
{{< tdopen >}}
Exam 2
{{< tdclose >}}
{{< tdopen >}}
25%
{{< tdclose >}}

{{< trclose >}}
{{< tropen >}}
{{< tdopen >}}
Paper and presentation
{{< tdclose >}}
{{< tdopen >}}
20%
{{< tdclose >}}

{{< trclose >}}

{{< tableclose >}}